

===== page 1 =====
PROCEDURES FOR USERS WHO WORK WITH RISK FROM IONIZING RADIATIONS AT LNL 
The person in charge of each experiment (or test) that is carried out at the LNL is required to: 
1. Deliver to the Radiation Protection S ervice, at l east 4 working days before the start date of each  
experimental shift, the form Declaration of Responsibility (https://www.lnl.infn.it/wp-content/uploads/
Responsability_Declaration.pdf), duly fill ed in,  especially the list of participants and their affiliation, 
and signed. If it is a new experiment, please provide the safety data sheet of the experiment.
2. Be sure that all non-LNL participants have completed the access authorization procedures at Legnaro  
National Laboratories.
3. Collect the personal dosimeters, if foreseen, of the participants in the shift from the Radiation Protection 
Service.
4. Arrange that the participants know and observe the radiation protection rules or any other safety  
procedures related to the experiment and that they correctly use the personal  dosimeters or any assigned  
safety device.
5. Ensure the execution of the procedure “search for persons” in the experimental room before any beam 
delivering.
LNL USERS – Radiation protection form and radiation protection documents 
A) LNL Users as INFN Employee/Grant Holder/Fellow/Associated
The submission to the LNL of the copy of their own INFN  radiation protection form automatically  
MEANS THAT their physical and medical surveillance are under the responsibility of their INFN  
organization (otherwise the “External Users” form should be sent to the LNL).
The radiation protection forms should be fulfilled in every part, with specific attention to the  
classification and dose constraints for activities at the LNL. If the information in the form is  
incomplete or wrong, the form will not be processed and the user will not be authorized to work  
with risk of ionizing radiation.
Exposed worker should provide to the LNL Radiation Protection Service:
- a copy of his/her suitability certificate, issued by the Medical Physics Expert of his/her Institution
- a declaration of the successful training in radiation protection, specifying the date of the training,  
issued by his/her Institution

===== page 2 =====
The above-mentioned documents must be not expired. 
 LNL USERS - ACCESS OF EXPOSED WORKERS IN LNL CLASSIFIED AREAS (controlled or supervised) 
• User access in classified areas of the LNL is normally not allowed.
In exceptional circumstances when this access is essential, Exposed users (Cat . A or Cat . B) must 
send a  duly motivated request  for authorization to enter a LNL  classified area (controlled or 
supervised) to the Radiation Protection Experts. 
If the request is accepted: 
- The legal requirements of art. 113 (Legislative Decree 101/2020) must be complied with.
 Or, as an alternative, 
- a "Contractual Agreement" should be sent to the Employer of the user, who is kindly asked to sign 
it and return to LNL, before the user starts his activity as an external worker, as required by current 
legislation.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE ACCELERATORS AND OTHER AREAS CAN BE DESCRIBED: if 
needed, please send an email to the radioprotection service. 
MEASUREMENT SHIFTS 
• Wi
th regard to the personnel included in the measurement shifts, as indicated in the Declaration
of Responsibility, the participation of Exposed and Non-Exposed Workers in the shift is authorized
if:
1. Activity is included in the radiation protection form
2. Valid successful training in radiation protection
Only for Exposed Workers:
3. Valid suitability to work with risk of ionizing radiation  (a copy of the medical certificate  should
be provided)
Only for Exposed Workers classified in Cat. A:
4. Radiation protection passbook, duly filled in.

===== page 3 =====
"Occasional visitors" 
Students who participate in  a single measurement shift are considered "occasional visitors" . The 
signatory of the Responsibility Declaration has the responsibility of their activity. Occasional visitors 
can be provided with a pen dosimeter, following the instructions that have always been in force at 
LNL (Surname, Name, starting dose and final dose, registered by the pen, must be recorded on a 
special sheet in the console area of the accelerator).  
Users who only stop in the «unrestricted area» during a measurement shift are required to comply 
with all the above rules. 
MEA
SUREMENT SHIFTS FOR WHICH THE RESPONSIBILITY DECLARATION IS NOT REQUIRED 
• The performance of activities with risk from ionizing radiation that do not require a Responsibility
Declaration to be provided (i.e. test with cavities, use of sources) depends on:
1. Activity included in the radiation protection form
2. Valid suitability, if provided for (and copy of medical certificate)
3. Valid training in radiation protection (also for non-exposed workers)
4. Radiation protection Passbook (only for Exposed Cat. A workers)
5. The measurement shift must be communicated to the LNL Radiation Protection Service at least 3
working days before starting, as far as it is concerned.
B) EX
TERNAL Users (whose employer is other than INFN)
They
 should provide to LNL Radiation Protection Service the “External Users”  form, duly filled in 
and signed by their Employer. 
If the information in the form  is incomplete or wrong, the form will not be processed and the user  
will not be authorized to work with risk of ionizing radiation. 
External users, according to the radiation protection classification and the activities to be carried 
out, are asked to apply all the rules indicated in the previous point A). 